PHASE 9 STEP 4.6 BUILD L5 - THE DESK, AND THE RUN UNDER WAY
captured 2026-07-28  ·  HEAD 92c70aa

THIS BUILD WAS 14/14 AND WRONG. An adversarial audit raised 25 findings; 22 survived refutation,
6 of them high. Three of them were invisible BECAUSE OF this gate's own checks. The gate below is
the rebuilt one: 20 checks, and where the claim is about BEHAVIOUR it now measures behaviour ---
it boots a server, issues hostile requests, runs processes, and hashes files before and after.

  ok  M2: the desk's bytes ARE SP.ControlPlane.GateRow.encode/1's bytes - 7 rows, byte-identical — and 5 of them came out of preRegistration() and afterRun() rather than being written here, so the comparison moves when the desk moves. Includes keys supplied in reversed order, a quote, a backslash and a tab.
  ok  M2: the desk's validator AGREES WITH THE WRITER on accept and refuse - 9 rows — one legal, eight the Elixir refuses (an impossible date, a numeric notes, a numeric supersedes entry, a non-kebab name, a wrong schema_version, an invented verdict, a missing class, an extra key) and the desk refuses all eight too. The page renders this output as "schema-valid", so a port that accepts what the writer refuses would tell him a row is writable when it is not.
  ok  NO VERDICT WITHOUT A RUN — including a hand-typed exit code - refused with nothing, with an empty observation, with a verdict handed over directly, WITH A HAND-TYPED {exit_code: 0}, and with a forged token. The first version accepted the fourth of those and its check was still called NO VERDICT WITHOUT A RUN — it proved 'no verdict without a number named exit_code', a weaker claim wearing a stronger name.
  ok  the verdict follows the exit code, both ways - 0→PASS · 1→FAIL · 2→FAIL · 137→FAIL · -1→FAIL. The runner's law, not a new one.
  ok  a gate that is not at HEAD is REFUSED, not FAILED - 1 registered gate(s) are not in HEAD and every one comes back NOT_AT_HEAD: lab-l5. A question that could not be asked must never wear the same word as an answer of no.
  ok  the BEFORE row says PENDING, which is the schema's own word for it - "registered but not run" — quoted from production/schemas/gate_row.schema.json. Everything except the outcome, which is exactly as much as can honestly be known beforehand.
  ok  the AFTER row carries blockers too, and says it is not writable - the row a real run produces is NOT writable, and it says why: receipt_path is empty, and the schema requires it. 11 of the 12 pending rows point receipt_path at their own pre-registr… The careful half of the desk used to be the half nobody reaches by pressing R.
  ok  the row that CANNOT be written says why, in full - gaia's gate_row is "gaia-*" — a glob, which the schema's kebab-case rule refuses, so the registry entry names a FAMILY of rows and the ledger has no shape for that.
  ok  the pending-row convention is MEASURED, and its exceptions are named - 11 of the 12 pending rows point receipt_path at their own pre-registration document; 1 do not (hud-renders-stale-as-stale). Recomputed here from the ledger, independently. It was written as a universal ("every one of the 12") in three places including the operator-facing blocker text, and it was never true — a stale universal rendered to a reader is worse than a stale comment.
  ok  NEGATIVE CONTROL: given a real receipt, the row comes out WRITABLE - {"schema_version":1,"name":"lab-l4-three-kinds-of-closed","receipt_path":"docs/receipts/control-plane/phase9_4.6_L4_green_2026-07-28.txt","verdict":"PASS","evidence_class":"C","last_updated":"2026-07-28"} — so the refusals above are refusals about THOSE rows, not a desk that says no to everything. A guard that refuses unconditionally checks nothing.
  ok  the gate id is a LOOKUP KEY, never a command - a path traversal, a shell string, __proto__ and constructor all come back NOT_IN_REGISTRY — the id is only ever used to find an entry, and the argv is built from that entry. A run endpoint that interpolated its input would be a remote shell wearing a floor plan.
  ok  THE RUN ROUTE REFUSES A CROSS-SITE REQUEST - measured against a booted server, not read off the source. A CORS-simple POST with a hostile Origin → 403 · application/json with no x-uni-cc → 403 · x-uni-cc with the wrong content-type → 403 · the proper shape → 200 and NOT_IN_REGISTRY · POST to any other path → 405 · DELETE → 405. This repository already mandated the header (command_center.cjs:1579, ADR-PROD-015) and L5 shipped without it; the previous check counted routes and never callers.
  ok  the run happens in a throwaway worktree at HEAD, with no shell and a timeout - argv is [node, <registry file>] and nothing else; shell:false; cwd is a fresh checkout that is removed afterwards; the child is killed after 180000ms, because a hung child would hold a worktree open indefinitely and the first version had no bound at all.
  ok  a real run, end to end, from the committed bytes - lab-l0 ran at 92c70aad in a clean checkout, exit 0 in 549ms, and the after-row came out PASS. Not a simulation of a run — a process.
  ok  NOTHING HERE WRITES THE GATE LEDGER (S4) - no write call exists in desk.cjs, and evidence/gates.ndjson hashes to 964ea25cfe8666ca… after several real runs — the same as before them. The desk shows the exact line and stops.
  ok  the runs did not touch the working tree, and left no worktree behind - git status --porcelain is byte-identical before and after every run in this gate, and the worktree count is unchanged (0 pre-existing besides the main tree). MEASURED, not asserted from source text — the previous version proved three regexes matched and called that "it cannot touch the working tree".
  ok  THE GAP IS RECOMPUTED HERE AND AGREES - 25 registered · 0 in the canonical ledger · 25 absent, derived independently from gate_registry.json and gates.ndjson. NOT ONE OF THEM IS. The runner's list and the canonical ledger are disjoint, and nothing has ever checked. The runner asserts its registry is COMPLETE — against the filesystem, which is a different question from whether the record knows these gates exist. Closing it means authoring rows in evidence/gates.ndjson, which is S4 — the operator's, not an agent's.
  ok  no gate count is written into prose - the headline is rendered from theGap() on every request, and nothing in either file states a count in words or digits — INCLUDING the comments explaining why. This check convicted its own correction's explanation on the first run, which is use-versus-mention for the tenth time here; the anecdote gave up its digits rather than the rule giving up its teeth.
  ok  the S10 seal bites — proved by injection, because nothing on this floor can reach it - with lab-l0-empty-room injected as pending, lab-l0 comes back SEALED_BY_S10. On the real ledger no registered gate_row is a pending row's name, so the branch is unreachable today and the payload says so rather than leaving a guard nobody has watched work.
  ok  the page says the gap out loud - a viewer is never left wondering whether the desks failed to load

GATE: PASS - lab-l5, 20/20 checks
  25 registered gates · 0 in the canonical ledger.
  Walk it: node viewer/lab/lab_server.cjs  ->  http://127.0.0.1:8103/lab/l5

--- L0, amended: its read-only clause became false at L5 ---
  ok  L0's OWN route reads no real state - /api/lab returns a fixed census of nodes: 0 and touches no evidence. The projection is L3's build and arriving early would mean showing real gates before anything can say what a fogged one looks like. NARROWED FROM A WHOLE-FILE SCAN, which stopped meaning anything once L3, L4 and L5 shared this server — it was passing by accident of file layout.

GATE: PASS - lab-l0, 10/10 checks
  Open it: node viewer/lab/lab_server.cjs  ->  http://127.0.0.1:8103/lab

--- the runner ---

GATE RUNNER: PASS — law holds for 22/22 run · 0 law violation(s) · registry complete. Verdict tally: 20 PASS · 2 FAIL.
(This runner asserts the exit⟺verdict LAW and its own completeness. A gate's own FAIL is law-consistent and does not fail the runner — it fails that gate.)
